---
title: 'A Refresher in Commutative Rings'
layout: post
tag: [algebraic number theory, commutative algebra]
date: 2018-12-31 16:44:35 +0800
---

In this post, we review the basic results from a first course in commutative ring theory.

<!--more-->

## Rings

The archetypal example of a ring is the set of integers $\bb Z$, with the operations of addition and multiplication. Note that $(\bb Z,+)$ is an abelian group, while $(\bb Z,\times)$ or even $(\bb Z\backslash\\{0\\},\times)$ is not, since most integers do not have multiplicative inverses.

A __commutative ring with identity__ (or simply __ring__) $(R,+,\cdot)$ is an abelian group $(R,+)$ equipped with another binary operation $\cdot$ (usually written as concatenation, ie. $a\cdot b=ab$), which is commutative, associative, and distributive over $+$ (ie. $a(b+c)=ab+ac$), with identity element $1$. An element of $R$ is called a __unit__ if it has a multiplicative inverse.

An __integral domain__ is a ring with no zero divisors, ie. if $ab=0$ then $a=0$ or $b=0$. A __field__ is a ring in which every nonzero element is a unit.

__Proposition__: Every field is an integral domain. $\qed$

## Ideals

An __ideal__ $I$ in a ring $R$ is an additive subgroup closed under $R$-multiplication, ie.

$$r\in R,\,a\in I\implies ra\in I.$$

$I$ is a __proper ideal__ if $I\neq R$.

For instance, the __principal ideal__ generated by $a\in R$ is defined by

$$(a)=aR\coloneqq\{ar\,:\,r\in R\}.$$

Given $a,b\in R$, we say that $a$ __divides__ $b$, written $a\mid b$, if $a=bc$ for some $c\in R$.

__Proposition__: For $a,b\in R$, the following are equivalent:
1. $a\mid b$;
2. $b\in (a)$;
3. $(b)\subseteq(a)$. $\qed$

$I$ is a __maximal ideal__ of $R$ if there is no ideal $J$ with $I\subsetneq J\subsetneq R$. By Zorn's lemma, we can show that every proper ideal is contained in some maximal ideal.

$I$ is a __prime ideal__ of $R$ if

$$ab\in I\implies a\in I\text{ or }b\in I.$$

The __sum__ and __product__ of two ideals $I,J\subseteq R$ are defined by

$$\begin{aligned}
I+J&\coloneqq\{a+b\,:\,a\in I,\,b\in J\},\\
IJ&\coloneqq\{a_1b_1+\cdots+a_nb_n\,:\,a_k\in I,\,b_k\in J\}.
\end{aligned}$$

We can check that $I+J$, $IJ$, and $I\cap J$ are all ideals, which satisfy the inclusions

$$IJ\subseteq I\cap J,\quad I,J\subseteq I+J.$$

## Quotient rings

It is easy to show that the (additive) quotient group $R/I$ is in fact also a ring (called the __quotient ring__), with operations given by

$$(a+I)+(b+I)=a+b+I,\quad(a+I)(b+I)=ab+I.$$

__Proposition__: Let $I\subseteq R$ be an ideal. Then:
1. $I$ is maximal if and only if $R/I$ is a field;
2. $I$ is prime if and only if $R/I$ is an integral domain. $\qed$

__Corollary__: Every maximal ideal is prime. $\qed$

## Coprime ideals

Two ideals $I,J\subseteq R$ are __coprime__ or __relatively prime__ if $I+J=R$. Note that if $I,J$ are coprime ideals then

$$I\cap J=(I\cap J)(I+J)\subseteq IJ\subseteq I\cap J,$$

so $I\cap J=IJ$. Also, if $I$ is coprime to each of $J_1,J_2$, then

$$R=(I+J_1)(I+J_2)\subseteq I+J_1J_2,$$

so $I$ is coprime to $J_1J_2$. Hence by induction we have:

__Proposition__: If $I_1,I_2,\ldots,I_n$ are pairwise coprime ideals, then $I_1\cap\cdots\cap I_n=I_1\cdots I_n$. $\qed$

For any two ideals $I,J$, form the product of the two quotient maps to obtain a ring homomorphism $\varphi:R\to R/I\times R/J$. This has kernel $I\cap J$, so we get the injective ring homomorphism

$$\widehat\varphi:R/(I\cap J)\to R/I\times R/J.$$

If $I,J$ are coprime, there exists $a\in I$, $b\in J$ such that $a+b=1$. Now for any $x,y\in R$, note that $\varphi(bx+ay)=(x+I,y+J)$. Hence $\varphi$ is surjective, thus so is $\widehat\varphi$, ie. $\widehat\varphi$ is an isomorphism. By induction, we get:

__Chinese Remainder Theorem__: If $I_1,I_2,\ldots,I_n$ are pairwise coprime ideals, then

$$R/(I_1\cap\cdots\cap I_n)\cong R/I_1\times\cdots\times R/I_n.\ \qed$$

## Local rings

A __local ring__ is a ring with a unique maximal ideal. We say that $(R,\mf m)$ is a local ring if $R$ is a local ring with maximal ideal $\mf m$. In this case, the __residue field__ of $R$ is $k=R/\mf m$, and we also say that $(R,\mf m,k)$ is a local ring.

Note that if $(R,\mf m)$ is a local ring, then every $x\in R\backslash\mf m$ is not contained in any maximal ideal of $R$, ie. $x$ is a unit. Conversely, if the set of non-units of $R$ form an ideal $\mf m$, then $\mf m$ contains all proper ideals of $R$, and hence is the unique maximal ideal of $R$, so $R$ is a local ring.

{% comment %}
<!-- A __semilocal ring__ is a ring with finitely many maximal ideals. By the Chinese remainder theorem,  -->
{% endcomment %}

## Integral domains, PIDs, UFDs

Let $R$ be an integral domain throughout this section.

The most important elementary property of integral domains is the _cancellation law_:

$$ab=ac\implies b=c$$

for any $a,b,c\in R$ with $a\neq0$.

An element $a\in R$ is __prime__ if $(a)$ is a prime ideal. An element $a\in R$ is __irreducible__ if $a$ is not a unit, and for any factorisation $a=bc$, either $b$ or $c$ is a unit. Equivalently, $a$ is irreducible if $(a)$ is maximal among proper principal ideals.

__Proposition__: Every prime in $R$ is irreducible. $\qed$

The standard counterexample for the converse is the element $2$ in the integral domain $\bb Z[\sqrt{-5}]$, which is irreducible (by considering the norm), but not prime (since $1\pm\sqrt{-5}\not\in(2)$ but $(1+\sqrt{-5})(1-\sqrt{-5})=6=2\times3$).

The prime factorisation of an element, if it exists, is unique up to unit multiples and the order of factors:

__Proposition__: If $a\in R$ has two factorisations into products of primes, say

$$a=p_1p_2\cdots p_n=p_1'p_2'\cdots p_m',$$

then $n=m$, and after some reordering of the $p_j'$ we have $(p_j)=(p_j')$ for all $j$.

__Proof__: $p_1$ prime implies that some $p_j'\in(p_1)$, say $p_1'=up_1$. But $p_1'$ is prime, hence irreducible, so $u$ is a unit. Then cancellation gives

$$p_2\cdots p_n=up_2'\cdots p_m',$$

so we replace $p_2'$ by $up_2'$ and finish by induction. $\qed$

A __principal ideal domain (PID)__ is an integral domain in which every ideal is principal. For instance, $\bb Z$ is a PID because every nonzero ideal is generated by its smallest positive element. Also, if $F$ is a field, then the polynomial ring $F[x]$ is a PID, because every nonzero ideal is generated by a nonzero element of minimal degree.

__Proposition__: Every nonzero prime ideal in a PID is maximal. $\qed$

__Proposition__: Every irreducible element of a PID is prime.

__Proof__: If $a\in R$ is irreducible then $(a)$ is maximal among proper principal ideals, so $(a)$ is a maximal ideal, hence prime. $\qed$

A __unique factorisation domain (UFD)__ is an integral domain in which every nonzero, non-unit element has a prime factorisation (which must then be essentially unique, as we have shown).

__Proposition__: Every PID is a UFD.

__Proof__: Given a nonzero non-unit element $a\in R$, start with the trivial one-term factorisation and repeatedly split a term into a product of two non-unit elements. If this process terminates, we have a factorisation of $a$ into irreducibles, which are primes in a PID.

Otherwise, [Kőnig's lemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C5%91nig%27s_lemma) implies that every infinite binary tree has an infinite path, so there is a sequence of ideals

$$(a_1)\subsetneq(a_2)\subsetneq\cdots$$

The union of these ideals is a new ideal, say $(a)$; but $a\in(a_n)$ for some $n$, so $(a_k)=(a_n)$ for all $k\geq n$, contradiction. $\qed$