---
title: 'Measure Theory (I): $\sigma$-algebras'
layout: post
tag: [measure theory]
date: 2018-09-11 12:06:27 +0800
---

The central concept of measure theory is that of a _measure_ on a set $\Omega$, which is a way to quantify the "size" of its subsets. However, it is usually impossible to assign such a "size" to every subset of $\Omega$ in a way consistent with the axioms of a measure. In this post, we define the notion of a $\sigma$-algebra, which we think of as the collection of all "measurable" subsets of $\Omega$.

<!--more-->

{% comment %}
<!-- For example, the _Lebesgue measure_ $\lambda$ on $\bb R$ measures the "length" of subsets of $\bb R$:

$$\lambda([a,b])=b-a,\qquad\lambda(\bb Q)=0.$$ -->
{% endcomment %}

## Preliminaries

Let $\Omega$ be a set. The __power set__ of $\Omega$, denoted $\mc P(\Omega)$, is the collection of all subsets of $\Omega$.

A __$\sigma$-algebra__ (or _sigma-algebra_) on $\Omega$ is a set $\Sigma\subseteq\mc P(\Omega)$, satisfying:

- $\emptyset\in\Sigma$;
- $A\in\Sigma\implies\Omega\backslash A\in\Sigma$;
- $A_1,A_2,\ldots\in\Sigma\implies\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty A_k\in\Sigma$.

In other words, a $\sigma$-algebra is a collection of subsets of $\Omega$ containing $\emptyset$, and is closed under complement and countable union. Note that closure under countable union also implies closure under finite union, by taking $A_k=\emptyset$ for all $k>N$.

Here are some examples of $\sigma$-algebras.

- Clearly, $\mc P(\Omega)$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$.
- By the axioms, any $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$ must contain $\emptyset$ and $\Omega\backslash\emptyset=\Omega$. Conversely, we can check that $\\{\emptyset,\Omega\\}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$.
- Let $A\subseteq\Omega$. Then $\\{\emptyset,A,\Omega\backslash A,\Omega\\}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$.

__Example__: Let $\lvert\Omega\rvert=4$, and let

$$\Sigma=\{A\subseteq\Omega\,:\,|A|=0,\,2,\,\text{or }4\}.$$

Then $\Sigma$ contains $\emptyset$, and is closed under complement and countable _disjoint_ union. However, the union of two 2-element subsets of $\Omega$ can contain 3 elements, so $\Sigma$ is _not_ a $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$.

Now we prove some elementary consequences of the axioms.

__Proposition__: For any $\sigma$-algebra $\Sigma$ on a set $\Omega$, we have:

- $A,B\in\Sigma\implies A\backslash B\in\Sigma$;
- $A_1,A_2,\ldots\in\Sigma\implies\bigcap_{k=1}^\infty A_k\in\Sigma$.

__Proof__: Note that

$$\begin{aligned}
A\backslash B&=A\cap(\Omega\backslash B),\\
\bigcap_{k=1}^\infty A_k&=\Omega\backslash\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty(\Omega\backslash A_k).\qed
\end{aligned}$$

In other words, $\sigma$-algebras are closed under countable intersection, and thus finite intersection (by taking $A_k=\Omega$ for $k>N$).

__Proposition__: If $\\{\Sigma_\alpha\\}_ {\alpha\in I}$ are $\sigma$-algebras on $\Omega$, then so is $\bigcap_{\alpha\in I}\Sigma_\alpha$.

__Proof__: Check that each of the axioms of a $\sigma$-algebra carry over to the intersection. $\qed$

For any collection $\mc S\subseteq\mc P(\Omega)$ of subsets of $\Omega$, we define the __$\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mc S$__, denoted by $\sigma(\mc S)$, to be the intersection of all $\sigma$-algebras on $\Omega$ containing $\mc S$. 

__Proposition__: For any $\mc S\subseteq\mc P(\Omega)$, $\sigma(\mc S)$ is the smallest $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$ containing $\mc S$.

__Proof__: By the previous proposition, $\sigma(\mc S)$ is a $\sigma$-algebra. By definition, any $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mc S$ must contain $\sigma(\mc S)$ as a subset. $\qed$

This gives a new way of creating $\sigma$-algebras:

- Let $\mc S=\\{\\{\omega\\}\,:\,\omega\in\Omega\\}$ be the collection of singleton subsets of $\Omega$. Then any $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mc S$ must contain all countable subsets of $\Omega$, and their complements. Conversely, the collection

  $$\Sigma=\{A\subseteq\Omega\,:\,A\text{ or }\Omega\backslash A\text{ countable}\}$$

  can be checked to be a $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$, so $\sigma(\mc S)=\Sigma$.
- More generally, let $\mc S=\\{A_\alpha\,:\,\alpha\in I\\}$ be a collection of disjoint subsets of $\Omega$ with union $\Omega$. Then by a similar argument, $\sigma(\mc S)$ consists of all countable unions of $A_\alpha$ and their complements.
- Let $\Omega=\bb R^n$, and let $\mc O_n$ be the collection of open sets in $\bb R^n$. Then $\mc B=\mc B_n=\sigma(\mc O_n)$ contains:
  - all open and closed sets;
  - all $G_\delta$ sets, ie. countable intersections of open sets;
  - all $F_\sigma$ sets, ie. countable unions of closed sets;
  - all $G_{\delta\sigma}$ sets, ie. countable unions of $G_\delta$ sets;
  - all $F_{\sigma\delta}$ sets, ie. countable intersections of $F_\sigma$ sets;
  - &hellip;

  The elements of $\mc B$ are called __Borel sets__.
- Let $a=(a_1,\ldots,a_n)$, $b=(b_1,\ldots,b_n)$, where $-\infty\leq a_k\leq b_k\leq\infty$ for each $k=1,\ldots,n$. Define the __half-open interval__

  $$[a,b)\coloneqq\{(x_1,\ldots,x_n)\in\bb R^n\,:\,x_k\in[a_k,b_k)\text{ for all }k=1,\ldots,n\}.$$

  Let $\mc H_n$ be the collection of all half-open intervals.

  __Proposition__: $\mc H_n$ generates the $\sigma$-algebra of Borel sets, ie. $\sigma(\mc H_n)=\mc B_n$.

  __Proof__: We give the proof for $n=1$; the case $n>1$ proceeds similarly.

  First, note that

  $$\mc H_1\subseteq\mc O_1\implies\sigma(\mc H_1)\subseteq\sigma(\mc O_1)=\mc B_1.$$

  Now $\sigma(\mc H_1)$ contains 

  $$\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty\left[a+\frac1k,b\right)=(a,b).$$

  Note that the topology on $\bb R$ is generated by a countable basis of open intervals. Hence every open set in $\bb R$ is a countable union of open intervals, which lies in $\sigma(\mc H_1)$. Thus

  $$\mc B_1=\sigma(\mc O_1)\subseteq\sigma(\mc H_1),$$

  so $\sigma(\mc H_1)=\mc B_1$. $\qed$


{% comment %}
()* &
{% endcomment %}